Phased Strimzi upgrade post (#478)
strimzi/strimzi.github.io: _posts/2025-03-26-phased-strimzi-upgrade-example.md

---
layout: post
title: "Phased upgrades of Strimzi managed Kafka fleets"
date: 2025-03-25
author: tom_cooper
mermaid: true
---

### Summary

When you upgrade an instance of the Strimzi Cluster Operator you will force **all** the Kafka clusters that it manages to roll. 
For large fleets this could be quite disruptive.
It would be nice to be able to decide which Kafka clusters upgrade to the new Strimzi version and when.

This post provides an example of how phased Strimzi upgrades can be performed.

> By using [kustomize](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/manage-kubernetes-objects/kustomization/) to create a deployment that allows multiple Strimzi versions to run concurrently and the `STRIMZI_CUSTOM_RESOURCE_SELECTOR` environment variable to allow us to specify which Strimzi instance manages which Kafka cluster via labels on the Kafka custom resources.

Reviewer: Is the official name uppercase Kustomize?

> By using [kustomize](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/manage-kubernetes-objects/kustomization/) to create a deployment that allows multiple Strimzi versions to run concurrently and the `STRIMZI_CUSTOM_RESOURCE_SELECTOR` environment variable to allow us to specify which Strimzi instance manages which Kafka cluster via labels on the Kafka custom resources.

Author: From reviewing their documentation, it appears not.

      - [Renaming Resources](#renaming-resources)
      - [Patching Environment Variables](#patching-environment-variables)
      - [Patching Role and ClusterRole Bindings](#patching-role-and-clusterrole-bindings)
      - [Watching all namespaces](#watching-all-namespaces)
      - [Operator Set](#operator-set)
   - [The Phased Upgrade Process](#the-phased-upgrade-process)
   - [Things to watch out for](#things-to-watch-out-for)
   - [Further deployment options](#further-deployment-options)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)

### Background

Strimzi handles the [upgrade of Kafka clusters](https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/latest/deploying#proc-upgrade-kafka-kraft-str) for you, making it simple and easy for infrastructure teams to handle these complex operations. 
The [upgrade of the Strimzi operator](https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/latest/deploying#assembly-upgrade-cluster-operator-str) itself is also straight-forward. 
However, when you have a large fleet of Kafka clusters being managed by Strimzi, there are several elements you must keep in mind when performing the upgrade. 

#### Custom Resource Definitions 

> The first step in a Strimzi operator upgrade is the Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) for the Strimzi Custom Resources (CRs): `Kafka`, `KafkaTopic`, `KafkaUser` etc (we refer to these as the Strimzi operator's _operands_). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first step in a Strimzi operator upgrade is to update the Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) for the Strimzi Custom Resources (CRs): `Kafka`, `KafkaTopic`, `KafkaUser` etc (we refer to these as the Strimzi operator's _operands_). 
```

Any operand CRs without the label will be ignored. 

You could then deploy _another_ cluster-scoped Strimzi operator with a different custom resource selector, `strimzi-0-43-0-b` for example, and tag a different set of Operand CRs with that label.
The two Strimzi deployments would coexist happily (provided you have setup independent RBAC -- more on this later), managing completely separate sets of CRs.

This features allows us to create a more robust upgrade process for the Strimzi Operator and its operands.

### Resource Selector based upgrade

Using the Custom Resource Selector allows us to have fine grained control over which operands are upgraded to new Strimzi versions and when. 
However, in order to use this process we need to deploy multiple versions of Strimzi concurrently.
That requires us to consider several key aspects of the Strimzi installation resources:

#### Concurrent Strimzi Deployments

##### Custom Resource Definitions

> The first major consideration when designing a deployment strategy for multiple Strimzi versions is the [Custom Resource Definitions](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/#customresourcedefinitions) (CRDs). 

Reviewer 2: You already introduced the CRDs in a previous paragraph, so you can link the doc there, and there is no need to define the acronym again.

Theoretically, Strimzi operands that share this API version can coexist and you _could_ run multiple versions concurrently on the same Kubernetes cluster (0.43. 0.44 ad 0.45 for example).
However, the only guaranteed and tested configuration is two adjacent Strimzi versions.
This has to be supported to allow the upgrade of a single Strimzi instance and so is tested as part of a Strimzi release. 
If you install more than 2 adjacent Strimzi versions you are running the risk of newer CRDs causing issues for older operands. 
For example operands being managed by Strimzi 0.43 when the 0.45 CRDs are installed in the cluster.
This is an untested configuration and so you may encounter issues.
Therefore, it is strongly recommended that you only run two adjacent Strimzi versions using a system like the one proposed in this post.

###### CRD API version upgrades

The next consideration is when the CRD API version is upgraded.
For example when Strimzi eventually upgrades from `v1beta2` to `v1` CRDs.
When this occurs you will need to first make sure **all** operands are updated to the latest Strimzi version running the old CRD API version (e.g. `v1beta1`).

> You will need to do this **before** you install the CRDs for the new Strimzi version which uses the new CRD API version (e.g. `v1`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You will need to do this **before** you install the CRDs for the new Strimzi version which uses the new CRD API version (e.g. `v1`).
```

To make this change we simply add one line to the `kustomization.yaml` in each Strimzi version directory:

`install-files/cluster-operator-0.43.0/kustomization.yaml`
```yaml
resources:
- 010-ServiceAccount-strimzi-cluster-operator.yaml
...
- 060-Deployment-strimzi-cluster-operator.yaml

nameSuffix: '-0-43-0'
```

That's it. 
You can see how it changes the names by building the kustomization with:
```shell
kubectl kustomize install-files
```

We can now add a newer Strimzi version by downloading the install files for that version, moving the CRDs to the separate `crds` folder (replacing the older ones) and then adding a `kustomization.yaml` to that version's folder with a different `nameSuffix`:

`install-files/cluster-operator-0.44.0/kustomization.yaml`
```yaml
resources:
- 010-ServiceAccount-strimzi-cluster-operator.yaml
...
- 060-Deployment-strimzi-cluster-operator.yaml

nameSuffix: '-0-44-0'
```

##### Patching Environment Variables

Sadly, the `nameSuffix` is not sufficient on its own. 
There are several other elements of the deployment files that need to be customised in order to allow the Strimzi versions to exist concurrently.

> The first of these are the environment variables in the Strimzi operator `Deployment` resource, several of which need to be individualised to each Strimzi version. 

Reviewer: Not sure about this _individualised_ in the doc
I might go for something like tailoring or customizing

Author: I agree, _tailored_ feels cleaner.

We can patch the env vars in the Strimzi cluster operator `Deployment` CR using kustomize.
To do this we create a yaml file containing the entries we would like to change or add.
We then tell kustomize to merge this patch yaml with the operator's `Deployment` resource:

Contents of `install-files/cluster-operator-0.43.0/patches/patch-deployment.yaml`
```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: strimzi-cluster-operator
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: strimzi-cluster-operator
          env:
            - name: STRIMZI_CUSTOM_RESOURCE_SELECTOR
              value: strimzi-resource-selector=strimzi-0-43-0
            - name: STRIMZI_LEADER_ELECTION_LEASE_NAME
              value: "strimzi-cluster-operator-0-43-0"
```

Contents of `install-files/cluster-operator-0.43.0/kustomization.yaml`
```yaml
resources:
- 010-ServiceAccount-strimzi-cluster-operator.yaml
...
- 060-Deployment-strimzi-cluster-operator.yaml

nameSuffix: '-0-43-0'

patches:
  - path: patches/patch-deployment.yaml
    target:
      kind: Deployment
      name: strimzi-cluster-operator
```

##### Patching Role and ClusterRole Bindings

> Another element that needs individualising for each Strimzi version are the `RoleBinding`s and `ClusterRoleBinding`s used by the operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `RoleBinding` and `ClusterRoleBinding` resources used by the operator also need to be tailored for each Strimzi version.
```

Again we can apply a patch to these in the `kustomization.yaml`:

Contents of `install-files/cluster-operator-0.43.0/patches/patch-role-references.yaml`
```yaml
- op: replace
  path: /subjects/0/name
  value: strimzi-cluster-operator-0-43-0
- op: replace
  path: /subjects/0/namespace
  value: strimzi
```

Contents of `install-files/cluster-operator-0.43.0/kustomization.yaml`
```yaml
resources:
- 010-ServiceAccount-strimzi-cluster-operator.yaml
...
- 060-Deployment-strimzi-cluster-operator.yaml

nameSuffix: '-0-43-0'

patches:
  ...
  - path: patches/patch-role-references.yaml
    target:
      kind: (RoleBinding|ClusterRoleBinding)
      name: ".*"
```

> This patch will, for _all_ `RoleBinding` and `ClusterRoleBinding` in the `resources` list, replace the name of the first entry in the `subjects` list (in the base installation files this always the operator `ServiceAccount`) with the name specified in the patch. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This patch updates all `RoleBinding` and `ClusterRoleBinding` resources in the resources list. 
It replaces the name of the first entry in the subjects list (which is the operator’s `ServiceAccount` in the base installation files) with the name specified in the patch.
```

```

Once we have applied this label to all the Kafka clusters in our fleet, we should see Strimzi 0.43 happily reconciling the Kafka CRs and the other Strimzi versions sitting idle.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
	S_043(Strimzi 0.43) --> K_A(Kafka A)
  S_043 --> K_B(Kafka B)
  S_043 --> K_C(Kafka C)
	S_044(Strimzi 0.44)
```

We now want to upgrade to a newer Strimzi version. 
The Kafka C cluster is our most risk tolerant cluster, it hosts topics used by low tier data pipelines which can tolerate extended downtime, so it will go first to ensure there are no issues.
We first check that the Kafka C cluster is error free and in the `Ready` state and then apply the Strimzi custom resource selector label for the 0.44.0 Strimzi operator:

```shell
kubectl -n kafka label --overwrite kafka kafka-c strimzi-resource-selector=strimzi-0-44-0
```

The 0.44.0 Operator instance will see the new cluster and update the image reference.
It will then roll the cluster, one broker at a time, on to the new image.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
  S_043(Strimzi 0.43) --> K_A(Kafka A)
  S_043 --> K_B(Kafka B)
	S_044(Strimzi 0.44) --> K_C(Kafka C)
```

> After a burn-in period, where we are happy with the stability of the cluster, our client side canary jobs are stable and no client teams are reporting issues, we begin to move the rest of the fleet.

Reviewer: "our client side canary jobs"  comes a bit out-of-the-blue
Will it raise any questions in the reader?
Could we keep this neutral " where the cluster remains stable and no issues are reported"

Author: Yes, that is a bit out of the blue. I will simplify it.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
	S_043(Strimzi 0.43)
  S_044(Strimzi 0.44) --> K_A(Kafka A)
  S_044 --> K_B(Kafka B)
	S_044 --> K_C(Kafka C)
	style K_A stroke:#f66,stroke-width:2px,stroke-dasharray: 5 5
```

All is well until we move our highest tier cluster, A. 
The move to Strimzi 0.44 revealed a configuration issue.
We think we know what the issue is and how to fix it, but as this is a critical cluster we need to roll back and make sure all the dependant services are running correctly. 
In this setup the roll back is a simple label change:

```shell
kubectl -n kafka label --overwrite kafka kafka-a strimzi-resource-selector=strimzi-0-43-0
```

```mermaid
flowchart TD
  S_043(Strimzi 0.43) --> K_A(Kafka A)
  S_044(Strimzi 0.44) --> K_B(Kafka B)
	S_044 --> K_C(Kafka C)
```

We fix the configuration issue and move Kafka cluster A over to the 0.44 operator.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
  S_043(Strimzi 0.43)
	style S_043 stroke:#f66,stroke-width:2px
  S_044(Strimzi 0.44) --> K_A(Kafka A)
  S_044 --> K_B(Kafka B)
	S_044 --> K_C(Kafka C)
```

> At this point the Strimzi 0.43 operator is not managing any Kafka clusters and all the clusters being managed by the 0.44 operator have been stable for sufficient period that we are confident we don't need to roll back. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point the Strimzi 0.43 operator is not managing any Kafka clusters and all the clusters being managed by the 0.44 operator have been stable for a sufficient period that we are confident we don't need to roll back. 
```

We can now remove the Strimzi 0.43 operator deployment and its associated RBAC resources.
At this point we can add a new version to the Operator Set, adding the 0.45 installation files and upgrading the CRDs to those of the 0.45 version.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
  S_044(Strimzi 0.44) --> K_A(Kafka A)
  S_044 --> K_B(Kafka B)
	S_044 --> K_C(Kafka C)
  S_045(Strimzi 0.45)
	style S_045 stroke:#008000,stroke-width:2px
```

#### Things to watch out for

The main things to watch for when using this Strimzi deployment pattern are:

> - Take note of the advice in the [CRD section](#custom-resource-definitions-1) above around the number of concurrent versions and CRD API version upgrades:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Take note of the advice in the [CRD section](#custom-resource-definitions-1) around the number of concurrent versions and CRD API version upgrades:
```

  - The only supported configuration is running two adjacent Strimzi versions concurrently.

>   - When upgrading the CRD API version. You will need to upgrade all operands to the last Strimzi version before the API upgrade, before adding the new Strimzi version with the new CRD API version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - When upgrading the CRD API version, you must first upgrade all operands to the last Strimzi version that uses the old API, before adding the new Strimzi version with the updated CRDs.
```

> - Extreme care should be taken, while updating the Operator Set, to not remove the CRDs from the Kubernetes cluster. Doing so would result in the removal of **all** Kafka clusters (and other Strimzi operands).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Take extreme care when updating the Operator Set to avoid removing the CRDs from the Kubernetes cluster. Doing so would delete all Kafka clusters and other Strimzi-managed resources.
```

> - You should ensure that the Kafka version of the Kafka CR is supported by the version of Strimzi you are moving too. This should not be an issue of are moving between adjacent Strimzi versions. However, you can add checks to deployment scripts and GitOps repository CI that checks for this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You should ensure that the Kafka version of the Kafka CR is supported by the version of Strimzi you are moving too. This should not be an issue if you are moving between adjacent Strimzi versions. However, you can add checks to deployment scripts and GitOps repository CI.
```

- When removing old versions of Strimzi that are no longer needed, care should be taken to make sure that no Kafka CRs are still labelled for that version. Again, scripting or CI can run checks against the Kubernetes cluster to ensure this.

#### Further deployment options

We have covered how to do upgrades using the custom resource selector and multiple different versions of Strimzi. 
However, there is no reason there should be only one instance of each version.
You could have `strimzi-0-43-0-a` and `stimzi-0-43-0-b`, you could then load balance Kafka cluster management between them.
This would be particularly useful if you have a large number of small Kafka clusters or _very_ large Kafka clusters with many brokers.

You could also separate out critical Kafka cluster management to a Strimzi operator with different RBAC.

> Perhaps your infrastructure management system itself runs though a Kafka cluster managed by Strimzi, you could have a separate Strimzi operator deployed just to manage this critical cluster and lock it down with very restrictive controls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Perhaps your infrastructure management system itself runs through a Kafka cluster managed by Strimzi. 
In that case, you could deploy a separate Strimzi operator dedicated to managing this critical cluster and lock it down with restrictive controls.
```

      - [Renaming Resources](#renaming-resources)
      - [Patching Environment Variables](#patching-environment-variables)
      - [Patching Role and ClusterRole Bindings](#patching-role-and-clusterrole-bindings)
      - [Watching all namespaces](#watching-all-namespaces)
      - [Operator Set](#operator-set)
   - [The Phased Upgrade Process](#the-phased-upgrade-process)
   - [Things to watch out for](#things-to-watch-out-for)
   - [Further deployment options](#further-deployment-options)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)

### Background

Strimzi handles the [upgrade of Kafka clusters](https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/latest/deploying#proc-upgrade-kafka-kraft-str) for you, making it simple and easy for infrastructure teams to handle these complex operations. 
The [upgrade of the Strimzi operator](https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/latest/deploying#assembly-upgrade-cluster-operator-str) itself is also straight-forward. 
However, when you have a large fleet of Kafka clusters being managed by Strimzi, there are several elements you must keep in mind when performing the upgrade. 

#### Custom Resource Definitions 

> The first step in a Strimzi operator upgrade is to update the [Custom Resource Definitions](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/#customresourcedefinitions) (CRDs) for the Strimzi Custom Resources (CRs): `Kafka`, `KafkaTopic`, `KafkaUser` etc (we refer to these as the Strimzi operator's _operands_). 

Reviewer 3: For me, the operand is the running _component_ operated by Strimzi. Not sure I would call the CR _operand_ - even double so for topics and users which do not have the traditional style _operand_ at all.

The CRDs are Kubernetes cluster-wide resources and need to match the most recent version of Strimzi you have installed on the Kubernetes cluster. 
This is because new fields could have been added to the CRDs that the new Strimzi version expects to be there. 
Strimzi CRDs are backwards compatible (within the same API version -- see [this section](#custom-resource-definitions-1) for more details), so older Strimzi versions are ok with newer CRDs (they will ignore the new fields) but not the other way around.

#### Strimzi Deployment

Once the CRDs are updated, you then need to [upgrade the Strimzi Operator](https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/latest/deploying#assembly-upgrade-cluster-operator-str) itself. 

> This requires you to update the [Deployment CR](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/main/install/cluster-operator/060-Deployment-strimzi-cluster-operator.yaml) (and any additional RBAC or other resources the new version needs). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This requires you to update the [Deployment resource](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/main/install/cluster-operator/060-Deployment-strimzi-cluster-operator.yaml) (and any additional RBAC or other resources the new version needs). 
```

When this occurs you will need to first make sure **all** operands are updated to the latest Strimzi version running the old CRD API version (e.g. `v1beta1`).
You will need to do this **before** you install the CRDs for the new Strimzi version which uses the new CRD API version (e.g. `v1`).
You would then follow any specific upgrade instructions and move each operand onto the new Strimzi version and CRD API version.

Using the last CRD API version upgrade as an example, we can illustrate the process. Strimzi 0.22 uses `v1beta1` and Strimzi 0.23 uses `v1beta2` CRDs. If we were running a setup with Strimzi 0.21 and 0.22 installed concurrently, to move to 0.23 we would need to:
- First move **all** Kafka clusters, Kafka Connect deployments and other operands to be run by the Strimzi 0.22 Operator.
- Then remove Strimzi 0.21 and only then add Strimzi 0.23 and its CRDs. This step is important as 0.21 based operands **cannot** run with 0.23 CRDs. 
- Finally move every operand across to the 0.23 Operator and perform the specific [CRD upgrade instructions](https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/0.23.0/deploying#assembly-upgrade-resources-str).

> - Remove the 0.22 Operator.

Author: Your suggestion is clearer. I have tweaked it a bit but the meaning is what you proposed.

│  ├── kustomization.yaml
│  ├── strimzi-cluster-operator-entity-operator-delegation.yaml
│  ├── strimzi-cluster-operator-namespaced.yaml
│  └── strimzi-cluster-operator-watched.yaml
├── crds
│  ├── 04A-Crd-kafkanodepool.yaml
│  ├── 040-Crd-kafka.yaml
│  ├── 041-Crd-kafkaconnect.yaml
│  ├── 042-Crd-strimzipodset.yaml
│  ├── 043-Crd-kafkatopic.yaml
│  ├── 044-Crd-kafkauser.yaml
│  ├── 045-Crd-kafkamirrormaker.yaml
│  ├── 046-Crd-kafkabridge.yaml
│  ├── 047-Crd-kafkaconnector.yaml
│  ├── 048-Crd-kafkamirrormaker2.yaml
│  ├── 049-Crd-kafkarebalance.yaml
│  └── kustomization.yaml
└── kustomization.yaml
```

To install the entire Operator Set you simply run:

```shell
kubectl -n strimzi apply -k install-files
```

Note that the namespace you install the Operator Set into needs to match the one you have used in the `patch-role-references.yaml`.

A full example of the Operator Set above can be seen in the [strimzi-phased-upgrade](https://github.com/tomncooper/strimzi-phased-upgrade) repository.
That repository also contains scripting to automate the addition of new Strimzi versions and templates for the generation of patch and kustomization files. 

> #### The Phased Upgrade Process

Author: Ahh that is a very good point. I have updated the walk-through.

In this setup the roll back is a simple label change:

```shell
kubectl -n kafka label --overwrite kafka kafka-a strimzi-resource-selector=strimzi-0-43-0
```

```mermaid
flowchart TD
  S_043(Strimzi 0.43) --> K_A(Kafka A)
  S_044(Strimzi 0.44) --> K_B(Kafka B)
	S_044 --> K_C(Kafka C)
```

We fix the configuration issue and move Kafka cluster A over to the 0.44 operator.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
  S_043(Strimzi 0.43)
	style S_043 stroke:#f66,stroke-width:2px
  S_044(Strimzi 0.44) --> K_A(Kafka A)
  S_044 --> K_B(Kafka B)
	S_044 --> K_C(Kafka C)
```

At this point the Strimzi 0.43 operator is not managing any Kafka clusters and all the clusters being managed by the 0.44 operator have been stable for a sufficient period that we are confident we don't need to roll back. 
We can now remove the Strimzi 0.43 operator deployment and its associated RBAC resources.
At this point we can add a new version to the Operator Set, adding the 0.45 installation files and upgrading the CRDs to those of the 0.45 version.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
  S_044(Strimzi 0.44) --> K_A(Kafka A)
  S_044 --> K_B(Kafka B)
	S_044 --> K_C(Kafka C)
  S_045(Strimzi 0.45)
	style S_045 stroke:#008000,stroke-width:2px
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Maybe you can here at the end mention that the same process can be used for Connect, MM2, and Bridge?

  - When upgrading the CRD API version, you must first upgrade all operands to the last Strimzi version that uses the old API, before adding the new Strimzi version with the updated CRDs.
- Take extreme care when updating the Operator Set to avoid removing the CRDs from the Kubernetes cluster. Doing so would delete all Kafka clusters and other Strimzi-managed resources.
- You should ensure that the Kafka version of the Kafka CR is supported by the version of Strimzi you are moving too. This should not be an issue if you are moving between adjacent Strimzi versions. However, you can add checks to deployment scripts and GitOps repository CI.
- When removing old versions of Strimzi that are no longer needed, care should be taken to make sure that no Kafka CRs are still labelled for that version. Again, scripting or CI can run checks against the Kubernetes cluster to ensure this.

#### Further deployment options

We have covered how to do upgrades using the custom resource selector and multiple different versions of Strimzi. 
However, there is no reason there should be only one instance of each version.

> You could have `strimzi-0-43-0-a` and `stimzi-0-43-0-b`, you could then load balance Kafka cluster management between them.

Reviewer 3: I think _load balancing_ suggests it happens automatically. Would sharding be better here?

Author: Good point, I went with "distribute between them".
